25/07/24, 18:06
Ryuk wakes from hibernation; FBI, DHS warn of healthcare attacks | Cybersecurity Dive
Pagina 1 di 6
https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/Ryuk-FBI-DHS-ransomware-healthcare/587961/
Ryuk wakes from hibernation;
FBI, DHS warn of healthcare
attacks
Researchers found that threat group UNC1878 is
responsible for one-ﬁ"h of Ryuk intrusions. “Herein lies
our monster,” said Mandiant’s Aaron Stephens.
Published Oct. 29, 2020
Samantha Schwartz
Reporter
Stock Photo via Getty Images
Ryuk ransomware fell off the radar when the coronavirus began its
global spread. Its silence hinted at its expiration or a rebrand in the
form of the Conti ransomware. 
Really, Ryuk was just in hibernation between April and August. 
On a call with the FBI, Department of Homeland Security and
Department of Health and Human Services, the agencies warned
the healthcare industry of a potential ransomware attack. ”CISA,
FBI, and HHS have credible information of an increased and
imminent cybercrime threat to U.S. hospitals and healthcare
providers,” the alert said. 
The expected onslaught of Ryuk ransomware could reach up to
400 hospitals, Alex Holden, CEO of Hold Security, told
cybersecurity journalist Brian Krebs.  
“Maybe Ryuk’s time had come and gone. Obviously, we were really,
really wrong,” said Aaron Stephens, senior threat analyst on

25/07/24, 18:06
Ryuk wakes from hibernation; FBI, DHS warn of healthcare attacks | Cybersecurity Dive
Pagina 2 di 6
https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/Ryuk-FBI-DHS-ransomware-healthcare/587961/
Mandiant’s FLARE Advanced Practices Team, while speaking
during a SANS Institute webcast Wednesday. 
Mandiant found that threat group UNC1878 is responsible for one-
fifth of Ryuk intrusions. “Herein lies our monster,” said Stephens
during the webcast. The cybersecurity firm released research on
UNC1878’s indicators Wednesday following news of attacks on
hospitals.
Mandiant researchers coined “UNC,” shorthand for uncategorized,
as part of their research processes, they needed “UNCs” to help
organize unique malicious activity. 
“At a fundamental level UNCs serve as labels for which you can
bucket indicators and techniques into. This labeled bucket would
then act as technical anchor for what we are seeing is related
activity,” said Van Ta, senior threat analyst on Mandiant’s FLARE
Advanced Practices Team, speaking on the webcast. “Instead of
labeling an evidence bag, ‘the Overlook Hotel’, we’re labeling it
UNC1878.” 
“We began to see Ryuk make its harrowing return. It
wasn’t dead. It was undead.”
Aaron Stephens
senior threat analyst on Mandiant’s FLARE Advanced
Practices Team
When enough UNCs are identified, researchers can cross section
overlaps or see where UNCs graduate into different classifications,
or threat groups. UNC1878 was created in January and within two
months Mandiant picked up UNC1878’s “formative years,” where
it developed its strategies, said Ta. 

25/07/24, 18:06
Ryuk wakes from hibernation; FBI, DHS warn of healthcare attacks | Cybersecurity Dive
Pagina 3 di 6
https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/Ryuk-FBI-DHS-ransomware-healthcare/587961/
In September, “we began to see Ryuk make its harrowing return. It
wasn’t dead. It was undead,” Stephens said. 
The actors behind Ryuk are credited with collecting more than $61
million between February 2018 and October 2019, according to the
FBI, making it one of the most profitable strains. Retirement didn’t
seem likely. 
Ryuk-related incidents increased from 5,123 in Q3 2019 to 67.3
million in Q3 2020, according to research from SonicWall Capture
Labs. The company relied on more than 1 million global sensors to
collect cyberattack data through September. 
Ryuk reportedly targeted Universal Health Services (UHS) in
September and French IT services firm Sopra Steria earlier this
month. Last week, furniture manufacturer Steelcase disclosed a
cyberattack on its IT systems in an SEC filing. Sources told
Bleeping Computer Ryuk was behind the attack. 
Steelcase “implemented a series of containment measures to
address this situation,” including system and operational
shutdowns, to mitigate the attack. “Although cyberattacks can be
unpredictable, the company does not currently expect this incident
will have a material impact on its business operations or its
financial results,” Steelcase said. 
UNC1878’s Ryuk gameplan
UNC1878 traditionally relied on Trickbot, which provides initial
access and visibility, and used Cobalt Strike with everyone of its
intrusions. UNC1878 obtains credentials using Mimikatz, LaZagne
and Kerbrute. 
“With legitimate credentials UNC1878 extended their access by
connecting to network shares and directly to systems over RDP

25/07/24, 18:06
Ryuk wakes from hibernation; FBI, DHS warn of healthcare attacks | Cybersecurity Dive
Pagina 4 di 6
https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/Ryuk-FBI-DHS-ransomware-healthcare/587961/
and SSH,” said Ta. 
This month, Microsoft was granted permission to disable
Trickbot’s critical infrastructure. A week into the disruption,
Microsoft claimed to have eliminated “94% of Trickbot’s critical
operational infrastructure including both the command-and-
control servers in use at the time our action began and new
infrastructure Trickbot has attempted to bring online.” 
However, Microsoft acknowledged the maturity of Trickbot and
impending threats, saying “this is challenging work, and there is
not always a straight line to success.”
Ryuk typically uses Emotet for a phishing or RDP attack, but
Sophos studied a September Ryuk attack which showcased a
different tactic outside of Emotet and Trickbot. “It marked the
return of Ryuk with some minor modifications” and next-
generation attack tools, according to Sophos’ report. 
“People think ransomware, and the malware cocktails, they’re just
re-flavoring. But if you look at Ryuk, they’re using it as a malware
cocktail, not just changing the ingredients,” said Bill Conner, CEO
of SonicWall. 
In the September attack Sophos investigated, the malicious
document in the phishing email executed Buer Loader, a modular
malware as a service downloader, to get access. 
Time to Ryuk
The September Ryuk incident Sophos investigated uncovered a
quick infection-to-deployment time after someone opened the
phishing email. It took 3 1/2 hours. While each installment
attempt failed, Ryuk’s operators persevered, “including renewed
phishing attempts to re-establish a foothold,” according to

25/07/24, 18:06
Ryuk wakes from hibernation; FBI, DHS warn of healthcare attacks | Cybersecurity Dive
Pagina 5 di 6
https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/Ryuk-FBI-DHS-ransomware-healthcare/587961/
Sophos.  
Operators behind Ryuk are “really recreating these malware
cocktails and bundles, if you will, to make them much more lethal,”
which increases their speed and scalability, said Conner. 
UNC1878’s “time to Ryuk,” or intrusion to execution time, was on
average about five days and 17 hours. It is demonstrably faster
than other ransomware’s “dwell time,” roughly 72 days and 12
hours, according to data from 2019. UNC1878 could “ransom 13
environments in the same amount of time,” said Stephens. 
When UNC1878 is ready to deploy Ryuk, it will drop the zip file
into the PerfLogs directory. “They’ll then unzip into a directory
they create named “share$,” said Ta. Coupled with text files are the
ransomware binary and patch files for malware propagation. There
are three ”.bat” scripts used for iterating computer names to
execute Ryuk. 
At the beginning of the year, UNC1878 used Trickbot, Cobalt Strike
and Ryuk. But Ryuk’s return doesn’t necessarily mean UNC1878
returned too. 
“This new wave of Ryuk intrusions have essentially replaced
Trickbot with Kegtap, a similar but distinctly different malware
family,” said Stephens. Kegtap is among campaigns sent to targets
with ever-changing ”delivery tactics, techniques and procedures,”
according to Mandiant. Campaigns like Kegtap have shifted from
delivery via Sendgrid to having URLs host malware payload
“associated with one or more of these legitimate services.” 
Even the use of Cobalt Strike isn’t the same as it once was,
particularly seen in TLS certificates. 
Mandiant noticed differentiation in certificates, nuances in domain
patterns, and general overlaps in activity. Researchers identified a

25/07/24, 18:06
Ryuk wakes from hibernation; FBI, DHS warn of healthcare attacks | Cybersecurity Dive
Pagina 6 di 6
https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/Ryuk-FBI-DHS-ransomware-healthcare/587961/
newly-minted UNC2352 as the successor to UNC1878. “If these
two groups should really be the same, the data will tell us and in
this case, it did,” said Stephens.
