Contact sales
Get started for free
Cloud
Blog
Solutions & technology
Ecosystem
Developers & Practitioners
Transform with Google Cloud
Threat Intelligence
Sandworm Team and the
Ukrainian Power Authority
Attacks
January 7, 2016
Mandiant
Wri!en by: John Hultquist
Update 1.11.16 - SANS ICS Team
Connects Dots
Updating the blog entry to bring a!ention to the recent
analysis published by Mike Assante from the SANS ICS
team.
"A"er analyzing the information that has been made available by
a#ected power companies, researchers, and the media it is clear
that cyber a!acks were directly responsible for power outages in
Ukraine. The SANS ICS team has been coordinating ongoing
discussions and providing analysis across multiple international

community members and companies. We assess with high
con$dence based on company statements, media repo%s, and
$rst-hand analysis that the incident was due to a coordinated
intentional a!ack."
Read the full SANS post here - and see below for iSIGHT
iSIGHT Pa!ners Analyst Comment
The SANS ICS blog con$rms conclusions previously reached by
iSIGHT regarding the nature of the Ukrainian a!acks (speci$cally
the role of destructive malware and phone disruption) and
a!ribution to Sandworm Team. iSIGHT Pa%ners believes this
incident is a milestone because it is the $rst major cyber a!ack to
substantially a#ect the civilian population and because of the
overwhelming impo%ance of the grid to multiple reliant sectors.
Fu%hermore, Sandworm Team's previous interest in US and
European critical systems underscores the threat they pose (see
below for more on Sandworm Team.)
Sandworm Team - Historical
Targeting of Ukraine and
Interest in SCADA Systems
Since last week, iSIGHT Pa%ners has worked to provide details on
the power outage in Ukraine to our global customers. We have
analyzed the forensic evidence we have been able to obtain from
the region, contextualizing it within our knowledge of cyber
espionage actors. Many details of the event remain unknown, and
given the nature of the incident, especially the use of destructive
malware, we do not anticipate every detail will be exposed.
However, we have linked Sandworm Team to the incident,
principally based on BlackEnergy 3, the malware that has become
their calling card.
iSiGHT Pa%ners has tracked Sandworm Team for some time - and
we publicly repo%ed on some of their activities in October 2014,
when we discovered their use of a zero-day exploit, CVE-2014-
4114. In that campaign, we saw targeting of Ukrainian government
o&cials, members of the EU and NATO. Sho%ly a"er releasing
information on their espionage operations, our friends at
TrendMicro found evidence that the operators were not only
conducting classic strategic espionage but targeting SCADA
systems as well. Evidence of this accumulated, and iSIGHT
Pa%ners released a follow-up blog were we assessed that activity

was reconnaissance for a!ack - a preparation for cyber a!ack to
be carried out in the long term. ICS-CERT released a separate
advisory as well.
Sandworm Team Activity - Late
2014 to Current Day
Sandworm Team went to ground sho%ly a"er being exposed in
October of 2014, and malware with Dune references (the genesis
for the 'Sandworm' moniker) which we had previously used to track
them disappeared entirely. However, the unique malware variant,
BlackEnergy 3, reemerged in Ukraine early in 2015, where we had
$rst found Sandworm Team. Throughout 2015 we saw increased
intrusion activity using BlackEnergy 3. We warned our clients of
new features suggesting an increased focus on European targets -
though veri$cation of targets was not possible at the time.
Additionally, we warned our customers about the targeting of both
media and regional power authorities in the Ukraine, sectors later
a#ected by cyber a!acks. Some of this information was recently
shared by the folks at ESET, who have also been following
Sandworm Team very closely for quite some time.
On the Ukrainian Power
Authority Incidents
Last week iSIGHT's sources provided us with the same KillDisk
malware published by Rob Lee of SANS and Dragos Security. As
ESET has, we place this malware within the greater context of
activity tied to BlackEnergy 3, which we believe is Sandworm Team.
We believe this KillDisk malware is related to the destructive
malware leveraged during Ukrainian elections in October. At the
time, CERT-UA connected that incident to BlackEnergy 3.
Symantec has since veri$ed those claims. Fu%hermore, iSIGHT's
own sources indicate that BlackEnergy 3 malware was deployed on
at least one of the Ukrainian power systems a#ected by KillDisk.
iSIGHT Pa%ners is still collecting information on the mechanics of
the power outage and what role the KillDisk malware played in the
greater event. We cannot con$rm that the KillDisk malware caused
the outage. It may have been used following steps to manipulate
power in order to impede restoration e#o%s or operator visibility. It
is notewo%hy that technical suppo% numbers associated with the
power authorities were allegedly 'ooded with calls, which may
have been an e#o% to fu%her overwhelm responders. On their
o&cial website, the Ukrainian security service, SBU, made this

Follow us
Google Cloud
Google Cloud Products
Privacy
Terms
Help
English
Related articles
Threat Intelligence
By Mandiant • 26-minute
read
Threat Intelligence
By Mandiant • 13-minute
read
Threat Intelligence
By Mandiant • 8-minute
read
Threat Intelligence
By Google Threat
Intelligence Group • 13-
minute read
claim.
Outlook
A cyber a!ack of this nature is a milestone -although a predictable
one. The aggressive nature of Sandworm Team's previous activity
in Europe and the United States exposed their interest in targeting
critical systems and indicated preparation for cyber a!ack.
Targeting of critical entities in Ukraine throughout 2015, during a
time of war, fu%her presaged a desire to disrupt infrastructure.
Posted in Threat Intelligence—Security & Identity
XRefer: The
Gemini-Assisted
Binary Navigator
Bridging the Gap:
Elevating Red
Team
Assessments with
Application
Security Testing
(QR) Coding My
Way Out of Here:
C2 in Browser
Isolation
Environments
Seeing Through a
GLASSBRIDGE:
Understanding the
Digital Marketing
Ecosystem
Spreading Pro-
PRC In"uence
Operations
